This video is to show an example, a selection of events that occurred across the British Empire in 1919.
One major event which still has ongoing consequences is in Ireland.
Now, in the 1918 general election, Sinn Fein won a large number of seats in that election.
In accordance with its manifesto, it chose not to use those seats in parliament in London,
and also it chose not to receive salary, and still that is the case.
But on the 21st of January 1919, Sinn Fein members created Dail Aeron, which met at the mansion house in Dublin.
It was intended to be the first complete step towards an independent Irish Republic.
That same day, the first shots of the Anglo-Irish war were...
...happened.
Two Royal Irish constabularymen were killed in an ambush at Solohead Beg in Tipperary.
In British Guyana, the trade union movement finally moved towards being legal.
Herbert Crishlow, the father of trade unionism, Guyana, and the leader of the British Guyana trade union,
these are his quotes.
January 21st 1919, we acted to start a trade union.
He means a legal trade union.
Charge an entrance fee and get the help of the unionists in England.
It was a very good idea.
A hundred of people paid an entrance fee on the spot, and the British Guyana trade union was started.
It had taken 14 years.
Men on the waterfronts, the carpenters, shop assistants and others,
seen they could gain by it, began to join the union.
On April 5th 1919, I called a mass meeting for the eight hour day.
I was arrested.
Because I gave out a hand bill, we'll a verse from the Marseillaise, and was charged with sedition.
The prosecutor said it would have been all right if I had quoted the whole thing,
but I had chosen two lines which were a call to arms.
However, the charge was dropped.
Between then and January 1st 1920, we gathered 13,000 members and £59,700 in the bank.
In Trinidad, as across the Caribbean, merchants increased their prices immediately what was declared.
There was no immediate need for them to do so.
However, they did.
The consequences of this, of course, for the working classes who were already at full stretch,
was times got even harder.
Even more so because their wages did not rise, even though productivity did rise under demands from government.
There were strikes in 1917 by the oil workers,
and then in 1919 by rail workers, stevedores, sweepers, sugar and dock workers.
South Africa is always a case in point.
In 1910, of course, the South African Union, the government,
introduced legislation disenfranchising Coloureds, Indians and Africans.
Mahatma Gandhi led a passive resistance campaign that started in 1911.
But that wasn't the only form of resistance.
Two examples from 1919.
70,000 African miners went on strike at the Witsberrand.
The strike was highly disciplined and organised and alarmed the government
who threw police cordons around each of the compounds,
preventing coordination of demands and action.
Troops broke through the workers' barricades and, with bainiks and
bainiks fixed, killed three and wounded 40.
Police and armed white civilians also attacked a meeting of solidarity with the striking miners,
killing eight and wounding 80.
In Cape Town, the first South African Indian Conference was convened by the Cape British Indian Council.
That conference resolved to agitate for full civil rights and to resort to civil resistance until those rights were granted.
In Egypt, on 8 March 1919, the British authorities arrested populist leader Saad Zaghloul, exiling him to Malta.
That event triggered the Egyptian Revolution of 1919.
In India, one of the most shameful episodes in British Empire history,
the Jallinwala Bagh Massacre, also known as the Amritsar Massacre,
took place on 13 April 1919, when troops of the British Army,
including Gurkhas, under the command of Acting Brigadier General Reginald Dyer,
fired rifles into a crowd of unarmed Indian civilians who had gathered in Amritsar in the Punjab.
The civilians had assembled for a peaceful protest to condemn the arrest and deportation of two national leaders,
Sacha Pal and Safuddin Kichlu, but also to honour the Sikh Festival of Basaki.
Over 370 died.
In China, and I should explain that China was one of the allied nations, not one of the big ones, during World War I.
It was also present during the Treaty of Versailles.
One of the reasons that the British had been able to persuade China to be involved
was that they had promised that all Chinese territories taken by Germany would be returned to China.
They reneged on that promise.
And in the worst way possible, because they gave those territories to Japan.
The May the 4th Movement was an anti-imperialistic cultural and political movement
which grew out of student protests in Beijing on 4 May 1919.
The students were protesting against the Chinese government's weak response to the Treaty of Versailles,
especially them allowing Japan to retain territories in Shandong.
The atmosphere and political mood that emerged around 1919
are at the centre of a set of ideas that have shaped Chinese momentous 20th century,
according to Rana Mehta, the Oxford University historian.
It's also true that that shaped thinking in a way that was fundamental to a future communist path.
Canada, June the 21st 1919, in what's called Bloody Saturday,
it was the Winnipeg General Strike,
and the Royal Northwest Mountie Police fired a volley of bullets into a crowd of unemployed war veterans,
killing two.
In Australia, there were a series of riots that had been occurring,
which were called the Red Flag Riots.
And in Brisbane, the most notable of them occurred.
Now the Red Flag Riots were in objection to an extension of the War Precautions Act,
which prohibited the flying of red flags,
which are considered to be a symbol of Bolshevism,
but also a symbol of the Trade Union Movement.
And following the arrest of one of the trade unions figureheads,
Peter Siminoff, in January 1919,
those demonstrations against the Red Flag Ban increased.
And on the afternoon of the 23rd of March 1919,
there was a demonstration against the War Precautions Act,
about 400 people who were marching from the trades hall.
This raised objections by returning soldiers.
And the following night, a crowd of 7,000 to 8,000 people, primarily soldiers,
tried to attack the trades hall.
They were held back by the police, but 100 men received police bayonet wounds.
The fighting lasted for two hours,
and in the end, 14 to 19 police officers were injured,
three police horses were shot, one died,
and 19 of the injured ex-servicemen had to be evacuated by ambulance.
As I said, not all nations wanted to be in World War I.
Ceylon, certainly the Senolis, were not in support of World War I,
but they had no choice.
So what World War I did was drive the forces of nationalism in Ceylon.
When the British arrested the prominent Senolis leaders
during what was a minor communal riot, it provoked widespread opposition.
In 1919, leaders of all communities,
feigning a need for a common platform from which to voice a nationalist viewpoint,
came together to form the Ceylon National Congress,
which united Senolis and Tamil organisations for the first time.
The non-white British Empire was taken into World War I,
as I've said, by the British government.
Some places objected, and others, like the Caribbean,
felt it was their duty to act in support of Britain.
However, in order to supply the war effort,
their own standard of living dropped dramatically,
and legislation was introduced to stop sedition or demonstrations.
What we've provided are just a few examples of events across the Empire.
As we move forward, we will provide a closer in-depth look
at individual countries and individual events.
My name is Jamie Baker, this is HDA Cardiff,
and it's the Racial Riot Project Wales 1919, funded by Heritage Lottery.